[SERVER-1353] Adding support documentation for expanding PVCs (#5671)
circleci/circleci-docs: jekyll/_cci2/server-3-operator-extending-internal-volumes.adoc

---
version:
- Server v3.x
- Server Admin
---
= CircleCI Server v3.x Internal Database Volume Expansion
:page-layout: classic-docs
:imagesdir: ../assets/img/docs/
:page-liquid:
:icons: font
:toc: macro
:toc-title:

toc::[]

== Overview
_Persistent Volume Expansion of MongoDB and Postgres is available for server v3.2.0 and up._

> If you have choosen to deploy either of the CircleCI databases (MongoDB or Postgres) within the cluster, as opposed externally provisoning these databases, then there may come a point at which the storage space initially made available to these databases is no longer sufficient. Internal databases in your Kubernetes cluster make use of https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/[persistent volumes] for persistent storage. The size of these volumes is determined by persistence volume claims or PVCs. These PVCs request storage space based on what has been made available to the nodes in your cluster. 

Reviewer: Couple tweaks. The phrasing still seems a bit awkward, though.

```suggestion
If you have chosen to deploy either of the CircleCI databases (MongoDB or Postgres) within the cluster, as opposed to externally provisioning these databases, then there may come a point at which the storage space initially made available to these databases is no longer sufficient. Internal databases in your Kubernetes cluster make use of https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/[persistent volumes] for persistent storage. The size of these volumes is determined by persistence volume claims or PVCs. These PVCs request storage space based on what has been made available to the nodes in your cluster. 
```

> In this document, we will run through the steps to increate the sizes of the persistent volumes used by your internally deployed databases, by increasing the size of our persistent volume claims. This operation should not require any downtime.

Reviewer: Small typo

```suggestion
In this document, we will run through the steps to increase the sizes of the persistent volumes used by your internally deployed databases, by increasing the size of our persistent volume claims. This operation should not require any downtime.
```

> In this document, we will run through the steps to increate the sizes of the persistent volumes used by your internally deployed databases, by increasing the size of our persistent volume claims. This operation should not require any downtime.

Reviewer: This wasn't true from testing with MediaMath:

`This operation should not require any downtime.`

We had to delete the Postgres/Mongo pods to propagate the change. The kubectl commands showed the right size but `df` was reporting the previous size until the pods were bounced.

----

We can also confirm this capacity is made available to a database by checking the size of it's data directory.

For postgres the directory is `/bitnami/postgresql`. We can confirm it's size using the command below.

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec postgresql-0 -- df -h /bitnami/postgresql
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme4n1    7.8G  404M  7.4G   3% /bitnami/postgresql
----

For mongodb the directory is `/bitnami/mongodb`.
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec mongodb-0 -- df -h /bitnami/mongodb
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme1n1    7.8G  441M  7.4G   3% /bitnami/mongodb
----

From the examples above, the capacities are still 8Gi. Lets increase the size to 10Gi

=== Step 1 - Confirm Volume Expansion is Allowed
First let's confirm that volume expansion is allowed in our cluster.

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl get sc
NAME            PROVISIONER             RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
gp2 (default)   kubernetes.io/aws-ebs   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   false                  1d
----

> As we can see, our default storage class does not allow volume expansion. However changing this is quite easy with the `kubectl patch` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, our default storage class does not allow volume expansion. However, changing this is quite easy with the `kubectl patch` command.
```

----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl patch sc gp2 -p '{"allowVolumeExpansion": true}'
storageclass.storage.k8s.io/gp2 patched
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl get sc
NAME            PROVISIONER             RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
gp2 (default)   kubernetes.io/aws-ebs   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   true                  1d
----

Now we may proceed to expand our volumes.

=== Step 2 - Delete the Database's Stateful Set
In this step we wish to delete the stateful set which controls our database pod, however we do not want to delete the pod itself as this would cause downtime. The command below will delete the referenced database's stateful set without deleting the pod. Not to worry, in the steps below we will be redeploying our statefulset. You may chose to delete one or both stateful sets, depending on which database volumes you wish to expand. The `--cascade=false` flag is most important here.

For postgres
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl delete sts postgresql --cascade=false
----

For mongodb
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl delete sts mongodb --cascade=false
----

=== Step 3 - Update the size of the Database's PVC

> Now that the stateful set has been removed, we can increate the size of our persistent volume claim to 10Gi. This is also quite easy to do with `kubectl patch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the stateful set has been removed, we can increase the size of our persistent volume claim to 10Gi. This is also quite easy to do with `kubectl patch`.
```

----

=== Step 4 - Update Kots Admin with the new PVC size
Now we need to head over to kots admin console to persist our changes. In the config section, we will update the values for our PVC size to 10Gi as shown below.

Postgres
image::kots-pg-pvc-size.png[Postgres PVC size]

MongoDB
image::kots-mongo-pvc-size.png[MongoDB PVC size]

Now save and deploy your changes. This will recreate the stateful set(s) that we destroyed earlier, but with the new PVC sizes which will persist through new releases.

=== Step 5 - Validate New Volume Size
Once deployed we can validate the size of the data directories assigned to our databases.

For postgres the directory is `/bitnami/postgresql`.
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec postgresql-0 -- df -h /bitnami/postgresql
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme4n1    9.8G  404M  9.4G   5% /bitnami/postgresql
----

For mongodb the directory is `/bitnami/mongodb`.
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec mongodb-0 -- df -h /bitnami/mongodb
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme1n1    9.8G  441M  9.3G   5% /bitnami/mongodb
----

> As we can see, the size of our directories has been increased.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, the size of our mounted directories has been increased.
```

/dev/nvme1n1    7.8G  441M  7.4G   3% /bitnami/mongodb
----

From the examples above, the capacities are still 8Gi. Lets increase the size to 10Gi

=== Step 1 - Confirm Volume Expansion is Allowed
First let's confirm that volume expansion is allowed in our cluster.

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl get sc
NAME            PROVISIONER             RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
gp2 (default)   kubernetes.io/aws-ebs   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   false                  1d
----

As we can see, our default storage class does not allow volume expansion. However, changing this is quite easy with the `kubectl patch` command.

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl patch sc gp2 -p '{"allowVolumeExpansion": true}'
storageclass.storage.k8s.io/gp2 patched
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl get sc
NAME            PROVISIONER             RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
gp2 (default)   kubernetes.io/aws-ebs   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   true                  1d
----

Now we may proceed to expand our volumes.

=== Step 2 - Delete the Database's Stateful Set

> In this step we wish to delete the stateful set which controls our database pod, however we do not want to delete the pod itself as this would cause downtime. The command below will delete the referenced database's stateful set without deleting the pod. Not to worry, in the steps below we will be redeploying our statefulset. You may chose to delete one or both stateful sets, depending on which database volumes you wish to expand. The `--cascade=false` flag is most important here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this step we will delete the stateful set, which controls our database pod. The command below will delete the referenced database's stateful set without deleting the pod. We do not want to delete the pod itself as this would cause downtime. In the following steps we will be redeploying our stateful set. You might chose to delete one or both stateful sets, depending on which database volumes you wish to expand. The `--cascade=false` flag is most important here.
```

> For postgres

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For postgres:
```

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl delete sts postgresql --cascade=false
----

> For mongodb

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For mongodb:
```

[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl delete sts mongodb --cascade=false
----

> === Step 3 - Update the size of the Database's PVC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Step 3 - Update the size of the database's PVC
```

> Now that the stateful set has been removed, we can increase the size of our persistent volume claim to 10Gi. This is also quite easy to do with `kubectl patch`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that the stateful set has been removed, we can increase the size of our persistent volume claim to 10Gi.
```

For postgres
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl patch pvc data-postgresql-0 -p '{"spec": {"resources": {"requests": {"storage": "10Gi"}}}}'
----

For mongodb
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl patch pvc datadir-mongodb-0 -p '{"spec": {"resources": {"requests": {"storage": "10Gi"}}}}'
----

> === Step 4 - Update Kots Admin with the new PVC size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Step 4 - Update KOTS admin with the new PVC size
```

> Now we need to head over to kots admin console to persist our changes. In the config section, we will update the values for our PVC size to 10Gi as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we need to head over to the KOTS admin console to persist our changes. In the config section, we will update the values for our PVC size to 10Gi as shown below.
```

> Postgres

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Postgres
```

image::kots-pg-pvc-size.png[Postgres PVC size]

> MongoDB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.MongoDB
```

image::kots-mongo-pvc-size.png[MongoDB PVC size]

Now save and deploy your changes. This will recreate the stateful set(s) that we destroyed earlier, but with the new PVC sizes which will persist through new releases.

> === Step 5 - Validate New Volume Size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Step 5 - Validate new volume size
```

> Once deployed we can validate the size of the data directories assigned to our databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once deployed, we can validate the size of the data directories assigned to our databases.
```

For postgres the directory is `/bitnami/postgresql`.
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec postgresql-0 -- df -h /bitnami/postgresql
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme4n1    9.8G  404M  9.4G   5% /bitnami/postgresql
----

For mongodb the directory is `/bitnami/mongodb`.
[source,bash]
----
circleci-user ~ $ kubectl exec mongodb-0 -- df -h /bitnami/mongodb
Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/nvme1n1    9.8G  441M  9.3G   5% /bitnami/mongodb
----

As we can see, the size of our directories has been increased.

> NOTE: If you find that after following these procedures, the disk size allocated to your data directories have not increased, then you may need to restart your database pods. This however will cause some downtime of 1-5mins as the databases restart. You may try the commands below to restart your databases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you find that after following these steps, the disk size allocated to your data directories have not increased, then you may need to restart your database pods. This, however, will cause some downtime of 1-5mins as the databases restart. You can use the commands below to restart your databases.
```
